.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii opusinfo.1
.\"
.TH opusinfo 1 2012-08-31 "Xiph.Org Foundation" "opus-tools"

.SH NAME
opusinfo \- gives information about Opus files and does extensive validity checking

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B opusinfo
[
.B -q
|
.B -v
] [
.B -h
] [
.B -V
]
.I file1.opus
.B ...
.I fileN.opus

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B opusinfo
reads one or more Opus files and prints information about stream contents
(including chained and/or multiplexed streams) to standard output. It will
detect (but not correct) a wide range of common defects, with many
additional checks specifically for Opus streams.

For all stream types
.B opusinfo
will print the filename being processed, the stream serial numbers, and various
common error conditions.

For
.B Opus
streams, information including the version used for encoding, number of channels
and other header information, the bitrate and playback length, the contents of the
comment header, and general statistics about the stream are printed.

Opusinfo is a fork of \fBogginfo\fR(1) with the non-opus parts largely removed.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -h
Show a help and usage message.
.IP -q
Quiet mode. This may be specified multiple times. Doing so once will remove
the detailed informative messages; twice will remove warnings as well.
.IP -v
Verbose mode. At the current time, this does not do anything.
.IP -V
Show program version info and exit.

.SH NOTES

There are many kinds of errored, invalid, non-normative, or otherwise
unwise stream constructions which opusinfo will not produce warnings
on. Passing opusinfo with flying colors is not certification of the
correctness of a stream. Future versions may detect more error
conditions.

.SH AUTHORS
.br
Michael Smith <msmith@xiph.org>
.br
Gregory Maxwell <greg@xiph.org>

.SH SEE ALSO

.BR opusdec (1),
.BR opusenc (1)
