.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii opusdec.1
.\"
.TH opusdec 1 2012-08-31 "Xiph.Org Foundation" "opus-tools"

.SH NAME
opusdec \- decode audio from Opus format to WAV (or simple audio output)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B opusdec
[
.B -hV
] [
.B --rate Hz
] [
.B --gain dB
] [
.B --no-dither
] [
.B --float
] [
.B --force-wav
] [
.B --packet-loss pct
] [
.B --save-range file
]
.B input.opus
[
.B output.wav
]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B opusdec
decodes Opus files into PCM Wave (uncompressed) files.

If the input file is specified as
.B "-"
, then
.B opusdec
will read from stdin. Likewise, an output filename of
.B "-"
will cause output to be to stdout.

If no output is specified
.B opusdec
will attempt to play the audio in realtime if it supports
audio playback on your system.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.IP "-h, --help"
Print help message
.IP "-V, --version"
Display version information
.IP "--quiet"
Suppresses program output
.IP "--rate"
.br
Force decoding at sampling rate n Hz
.IP "--gain"
.br
Adjust the output volume n dB, negative values make the signal quieter.
.IP "--no-dither"
Do not dither 16-bit output
.IP "--float"
32-bit floating-point files instead of 16-bit files
.IP "--force-wav"
Force including a wav header on output (e.g. for non-wav extensions and stdout)
.IP "--packet-loss"
Simulate n % random Opus packet loss
.IP "--save-range"
Saves check values for every frame to a file

.SH EXAMPLES
Decode a file
.B input.opus
to
.B output.wav
.RS
opusdec input.opus output.wav
.RE

Play a file
.B input.opus
and force output at 48000 regardless of
the original sampling rate
.br
.I (48kHz output may be faster, due to avoiding resampling and some sound hardware produces higher quality output when run at 48kHz)
.RS
opusdec --rate 48000 input.opus
.RE

Re-encode a high bitrate Opus file to a lower rate
.RS
opusdec --force-wav input.opus - | opusenc --bitrate 64 - output.opus
.RE

Play an http stream
.B http://icecast.somwhere.org:8000/stream.opus
with the help of curl on a system with pulseaudio
.br
.I (press ctrl-c to quit)
.RS
curl http://icecast.somwhere.org:8000/stream.opus | padsp opusdec -
.RE

.SH AUTHORS
.br
Jean-Marc Valin <jmvalin@jmvalin.ca>
.br
Gregory Maxwell <greg@xiph.org>

.SH BUGS

Opusdec does not currently reject all invalid files which it should reject.
It also doesn't provide very helpful output for the corrupted files it
does reject. Use \fBopusinfo\fR(1) for somewhat better diagnostics.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR opusenc (1),
.BR opusinfo (1)
